Good afternoon.
My name's Adam Swift.
I'm a senior software engineer
in the Core Data team,
and I'd like to welcome you for the
Using iCloud with Core Data session.
In this session,
you will learn how to take what's
really a relatively simple set of
APIs to build a robust and well-behaving
iCloud Core Data application.
We're going to take you through
the steps necessary to go from an
idea to a fully functional app.
And we're going to give you sample code
to help illustrate-- You're welcome.
We're going to give you sample
code to help illustrate the
strategies and the points that we're
making throughout this session.
And in fact, we're going to try and tie
in as much as possible the
sample code into the session,
and that will be made available to you
through the conference attendee site.
If you look up the session,
you should find a link
to the sample code there.
Alternatively,
you can also look it up by name.
It's the shared Core Data sample.
So you shouldn't have to write down
any of the code samples you see on
stage throughout this presentation.
They'll all be available to you
with references into that sample
code that you can download.
So before we get into
using Core Data in iCloud,
I wanted to take a minute to ask for a
little bit of audience participation.
We were curious to try and understand
how many of you think or would
describe yourselves as an experienced
Core Data user at this point?
That's pretty good.
Okay.
And how many of you would describe
yourselves as only having looked at
Core Data or maybe are considering
using it in a new application?
Okay.
All right.
Well, I wanted to just quickly,
before we get into using
Core Data with iCloud,
talk about the technologies
that we're discussing today.
And Core Data is an application
technology that helps you
manage your application data.
So in the context of this session,
the data that we're talking about
is stored in an SQLite database.
And in the terminology of Core Data,
we call that a persistent store.
When you pull data from that
database using Core Data,
we talk about those
records as managed objects,
and you work with them in
a managed object context.
When you've made your changes
in the application's managed
object context and saved them,
Core Data takes care of putting
those records back into the
persistent store or database.
Now, what do you get when you take
Core Data and you add iCloud?
Well, it means instead of your data
just living on the file system
in a Deskulite database,
that data is made available
through iCloud to all the
iCloud connected devices.
So changes you make on your iPhone
and save are available on an iMac,
and changes on the iMac are then
made available to the iPhone as well.
And the specific features that
you get with Core Data and
iCloud are significant.
The big one that I want to call out
here is per record conflict resolution.
And what that means is that if you
make changes between one device
and another on a single record,
Core Data does the work to reconcile
what changes belong at the end,
merging those changes
together to be consistent.
And I'm going to illustrate what
that means a little bit here.
So we've got a record here,
John Doe and John@apple.com
is the person data.
And then on an iPhone,
I may go ahead and change
the first name to Johnny.
And then later I may go ahead
and change the last name,
strangely, to Appleseed.
Meanwhile, on my iMac,
which doesn't have its
Ethernet connection right now,
I go ahead and change the email address
for John Doe to johnny@apple.com.
Well, when all these devices are able to
connect up on the network again,
that record will be reconciled with
those changes automatically by Core Data,
using the information from iCloud,
without any extra work from you.
Some other features you get with iCloud
and Core Data is Core Data does a lot
of work to only transfer the smallest
amount of data necessary to iCloud,
minimizing the amount of network
bandwidth when you make a change.
It doesn't upload all of the data
that you're storing in your database,
just the parts that changed.
And those changes are asynchronously
imported in the background on your
other iCloud-connected devices.
So you don't have to do any
work to import those changes.
We take care of it for you,
merging in the per-record
conflict resolutions.
And last but not least,
we also support lightweight
schema migration with iCloud.
So that means if you've got one
device running an older version of
your app that's connected to iCloud,
and a newer device,
or another device connected to
a newer version of your app,
with a new schema, those changes,
because they're based on
different schema data models,
they can't be combined at that time.
But when all the devices are
upgraded to a consistent version,
we will then migrate the
changes that live in iCloud to
bring all that data together,
so those changes won't be lost
even through that schema migration.
And to use Core Data with iCloud,
you need the standard sets
of tools you need to develop
an application using iCloud.
Xcode and the iOS or OS X SDKs.
And then you can use the
Core Data project template
or start with the sample code
that we're providing you today.
And then you want to enable the
iCloud entitlements for your project.
You also need to sign up through
the provisioning portal to get
an app ID registered for iCloud,
and get a provisioning profile
for any devices you want
to run your application on.
All right, with that,
I'd like to get into talking
about using iCloud with Core Data.
And we've broken this up
into three main focus areas.
The first is your application design,
designing your application to work
well with iCloud and Core Data.
The second is the application
launch experience.
And then last,
I'm going to turn it over to Nick,
who's going to talk about
working with your application
in the application lifecycle.
So let's start off with
the application design.
And when we're talking
about application design,
especially keeping in mind iCloud,
you want to think about what
your users' expectations are.
Users love iCloud.
It means they can work with their
data on their iMac and then go
on the road with their iPhone,
and that same data is available to them,
and they can continue to work with it,
and then it'll be available back on
their Mac when they get home again.
So your users kind of want
to have all that data shared
through iCloud available to them.
But you also want to consider some of the
practical issues of what kind of network
you're going to be connecting over.
What if your user isn't
signed into iCloud,
or what if they switch to
a different iCloud account?
And also,
just how much data are you really
going to accumulate in iCloud?
And you don't want to overrun that
and lead to a bad user experience.
So we want to talk about how to
divide up your data so that the data
that's important to be available to
your users across all their devices
is made available through iCloud.
But maybe some of that data
can be derived or recalculated.
Or maybe it's changing with such a
high frequency that you don't want
to clog up the network connection
with lots of changes all the time
that really aren't preserved.
So the general approach that we would
suggest is using one iCloud enabled
store for data that can be shared,
and then using a local store for
data that can be recalculated
or just belongs on the device
because of the nature of that data.
So I've talked about putting
your data into iCloud,
but what does that really mean?
What am I talking about there?
Not your persistent store file.
The problem is,
the persistent store file in
this case is an SQLite database.
And SQLite uses fine-grained file
system controls to control access
so that it maintains internal
consistency with your data.
It does a very good job of
making sure that it doesn't get
corrupted and things like that.
But this is not the type of file system
access that iCloud is designed to handle.
Core Data uses a strategy of
transferring the incremental changes,
or something we'll also
refer to as transaction logs,
to iCloud that represent the
data in your persistent store.
So you can also think about
your persistent store file,
when it is enabled for iCloud,
as a cache that represents the
data that's being stored in iCloud.
You're going to access your data
through the persistent store file.
You don't access the
data in iCloud directly.
And one of the nice features of
that is that at any point in time,
you can recreate that persistent
store file from the data
that's available in iCloud.
And I'll refer to that
later in another section.
So what about the case where you want
to enable iCloud for one of your stores,
but the user hasn't signed
in or signed up for iCloud?
Well, in that case,
we're going to talk about
this as a fallback store.
When your user hasn't signed
up for an iCloud account,
you want to still be able to provide
a seamless app experience so your
user can develop or can work with
data and utilize your application,
but that data won't be uploaded
or transferred to iCloud until
they sign up for an account
or sign into their account.
We call this a fallback store because
it's slightly different than the
local store that's designed for data
that just belongs on your device.
The fallback store is really representing
data you want to put into iCloud,
but the user hasn't made
iCloud available to you yet.
This is sort of the same position
you'll be in if you have an existing
application that utilizes Core Data,
but does not yet utilize iCloud.
Your users may have developed
a significant body of
data in this application,
but since your application hadn't
enabled access to iCloud on the device,
you'll probably want to make
that data available to iCloud,
and that's where it's
the common experience.
At some point in time,
when the user signs into iCloud or when
your app makes iCloud available to them,
you want to move that store data
to the iCloud-enabled store.
So for the case of the
iCloud-enabled store,
when your user has signed into iCloud,
You need to choose a place
where that persistent store file
will live on the file system.
And that's a decision you need
to make for your application,
based on the access needs
of your application.
Do you want to make that
data only accessible when the
user is signed into iCloud?
Or do you want to let the user
access that data even after
they've signed out of iCloud,
but only in a read-only manner?
So if it's the case that you only
want to let the user access the data
when they're signed into iCloud,
then what we would recommend is put
the store in the iCloud container.
But wait, you're going to say.
You just told me two slides ago.
I should never do that.
It'll destroy the world.
Well, this is a special case where
if you create a folder called,
say, myfolder.nosync,
something with .nosync in the name,
in the iCloud container,
that's a special rule that means
that that folder and its contents
will not be transferred to iCloud.
So why would you want to do this?
Well, it makes it easy to make sure that
your store file is only going to be
associated with the data that you've
stored in iCloud for that store file.
If the user switches accounts,
the container is removed and
the store file goes with it.
Remember, you can always rebuild the
store file from the Cloud data,
so the data isn't lost.
You just need to repopulate
it after that switch.
And the main feature of this,
as far as we're concerned,
is that it's simple.
You're guaranteed that the
persistent store file that you have,
that you're working with for that data,
for that user's iCloud account,
will only be accessible when they're
signed into that iCloud account.
You don't need to worry about mixing
up your persistent store file with
a different iCloud account's data
that's been created from a store.
So the alternative, though,
is to put the persistent store
file in the application sandbox.
You're still going to
write your data to iCloud,
But it means that even if the
user is signed out of iCloud,
that persistent store file
will survive account changes,
like sign outs or switching
to a different account.
But what it does is it shifts some burden
to you to make sure that you only make
any access in terms of changes to that
persistent store file when you're able
to connect to that same iCloud container.
You can still use that persistent
store file in a read-only manner by
using the NSReadOnlyPersistentStore
option to access that data in a
read-only manner if they're signed out
or signed into a different account.
And you can even move that data into a
fallback store if they're signed out,
where you can then work
with the data locally.
So I've talked about a couple different
scenarios with persistent stores,
and I think I mentioned it before, but
The focus here is,
going back to where I started,
talking about what data do you want
to store locally on the device that
really only belongs on the device,
and what store do you want to put into
iCloud so it's available across devices?
How do you want to partition this data?
Well, you need to do it by assigning
one store to be local and one
store to be iCloud enabled.
You can have more than one,
but fundamentally,
it's per store you make this decision.
And there's a couple different ways
to achieve that division of data.
One is you could use different
models and different coordinators,
but the other one that we're going to
talk about for a minute here is to use
different data model configurations.
So what is a data model configuration?
Well, it gives you a way to carve
out a subset of the entities
in your data model and say,
I want to work with those entities
in my iCloud enabled store,
and I want to work with these
entities in my local data store.
So it's a convenient way to be able
to work with a single data model
that combines all of these entities,
but identify certain entities for
use with one store versus another.
One of the big benefits
here is that you can then,
with a single managed object context,
access data from both of those store
files using different configurations
and bring them into the same context.
And then when your user interface
decides it's time to save,
we'll save out those records
to the appropriate store
according to the configuration
that they're associated with.
So how do you create a configuration?
You do it in the Xcode
data modeling tool.
And you can see here,
here's the data model
from the sample code.
And I've created two entities,
a person and a state location.
So in this case,
I want the person entity to
be shared across devices.
I wanted that to go into
my iCloud enabled store.
But the state location,
we're actually just going to
bundle the 50 states as read-only
data with our application.
So that's going to stay
in the local store.
There's no reason to
share that through iCloud.
So how do I create a configuration?
I use this pull-down menu
here to add a configuration.
And then I name my one
configuration Cloud-- not clown,
Cloud Config,
and I put my person entity into that.
Then I create a second
configuration called Local Config,
and I put my state
location into that one.
Then to actually create
these stores in code,
I use the addPersistentStore method
on my persistent store coordinator,
and specify the cloud
configuration for my cloud store,
and specify the local
configuration for the local store.
So in summary,
the focus on application design should
be on what do your users expect to be
able to work with across their devices?
What data belongs in iCloud versus
what data belongs in the local store?
Think about where that data should go,
considering the limitations of
maybe a limited network at times,
or users who haven't signed into iCloud,
or may switch accounts
for different reasons.
And last,
think about the trade-offs between
simplicity and additional functionality
in terms of where you put your
iCloud-enabled store on the file system.
All right,
now I'd like to switch gears and
talk about application launch.
An application launch
seems like a simple thing,
not a lot of complexity to it.
But you need to consider that there may
be a lot of different scenarios under
which your application is launched.
This may be the first launch from a new
user of your application on a device,
and you may want to seed some data
into your iCloud enabled store.
Or maybe it's a new device,
but your user has been using
your application for a long
time on another device,
so there's a lot of existing data that
you want to make sure is presented to the
user when they launch your application.
So the goals here are you want
to get to a full usable user
interface for your application,
and you want to evaluate the status
of what's going on at launch time.
Is everything ready to go?
Is all the data present on the file
system already and all you need
to do is present it to the user?
Or is this the first launch
and you need to seed?
Or has this user not signed into
iCloud and now you need to fall back
to keeping your iCloud enabled data in
a fallback store until they do sign in?
And throughout all of this,
you want to make sure your
application stays responsive,
so your user interface isn't
waiting while you're figuring out
the results of these questions.
So let's walk through the launch steps.
User launches your app.
You present an initial UI to your user.
And then you need to make that decision.
Check the iCloud status.
Is the user signed in?
If they are, then you want to kick
off a background queue.
So you do this work in the background
to add your iCloud-enabled store,
maybe seed some data,
and then when everything's ready to go,
notify your user interface that this
data's ready to be displayed to the user.
On the other hand,
what if the user is not signed in?
What if there isn't an
iCloud account available?
Well, again, in this case,
we're going to want to kick off a
background queue to do this work,
because we don't know how
much work we have to do yet.
We'll want to add a fallback store,
maybe.
We might want to do some
work on that fallback store.
And again,
when we're done doing all that setup,
notify the user interface
that it's time to refresh.
All that data is available now.
So, now I'd like to walk you
through the code that's involved
in evaluating those steps.
And you can see in the top
corner of the screen here,
we've got a little bookmark that
indicates this code is taken
from the sample code that's
been made available to you.
And kind of like a pointer to the
method where that code appears.
So in this one,
we're going to check the iCloud status.
We want to find out if our
iCloud user is signed in.
This can be done very quickly.
And so this method is a new
piece of API available to
you through NS File Manager.
It's the Ubiquity Identity Token.
And you can call it
right on the main thread.
It's designed to give you
a result very quickly.
And you'll get back an opaque
value that you can compare between
application launches by archiving it.
or within the application,
you can check to see,
is it equal to the value you had before?
Maybe if your user suspended the app,
switched iCloud's accounts and went back,
it may have changed.
And if that value comes back as nil,
then you know your user
is not signed into iCloud.
So the next step is we want
to add our persistent stores.
And like I was saying before,
we want to do that on a background queue.
And so I wanted to show you,
these are the dispatch APIs you can use,
and they're, again,
available in the sample code,
to kick off a background
queue to asynchronously
load the persistent stores.
Now, there's a number of pieces of work
that are happening in loading the
asynchronous loading persistent stores.
We deal with some other cases,
and Nick's going to detail
some of those for you later.
But right now,
I just wanted to focus on the steps
involved in loading the iCloud store.
And this walks you through the main
APIs that interact with iCloud here.
First, now we want to use the file
manager API to get the URL to
access the iCloud container.
And the reason why we want to execute
this on the asynchronous call,
on the background queue,
is because if this is the first
time your user has accessed
iCloud through your application,
or accessed iCloud
through any application,
there might be some file system
setup that needs to happen,
and it might take longer than you want
your user to wait on the main thread.
So first thing we do is we get that URL.
The next step is we want to
get the iCloud store URL.
And this is actually a method
that we've provided and
implemented in the sample code.
And what this will do is we decided
to follow the code path of providing
access to the persistent store
file when the user signed out.
So we're storing the persistent
store file in the app sandbox.
And so what this method is doing is
it's creating a path that's uniquely
constructed based on the iCloud
user who is signed in currently.
So that's the way we make sure that
one iCloud account is associated with
one store file with iCloud enabled.
And you can look that up.
The next steps are we then want to
set the options to enable iCloud
for our persistent store file.
And those are the persistent store,
ubiquitous content name key.
And then we want to set the
options to enable iCloud for
our persistent store file.
And those are the persistent store,
ubiquitous content name key,
because iCloud is a very
powerful tool for iCloud.
And then we want to set the
options to enable iCloud for
our persistent store file.
And those are the persistent store,
ubiquitous content name key,
because iCloud is a very
powerful tool for iCloud.
And then we want to set the
options to enable iCloud for
our persistent store file.
And then we want to set the
options to enable iCloud for
our persistent store file.
And because we're only working with
one iCloud enabled store at a time,
we just name this the iCloud store.
That is what's identifying the
name of the ubiquitous content
that we're putting into iCloud.
Then the next piece is the persistent
store ubiquitous content URL key.
And what this does is this provides
Core Data the path that it should
use to store those transaction
logs or the incremental changes
that we're putting into iCloud.
And the way we've constructed
the iCloud data URL is by taking
that ubiquity URL and tacking
on iCloud data on top of it.
Then we pass those options to
our call to add persistent store,
and you can see we're using
the Cloud Config here again.
And away we go.
Our coordinator should add the store.
So the next step,
and this is actually implemented in the
asynchronous load persistent stores,
is if we're successful at
loading the iCloud store,
then we want to check,
do we need to seed any data
into that iCloud store?
So I wanted to call that out
because you'll be able to check
up on that in the sample code,
and Nick will talk a little bit
more about seeding your store.
But this is the time in that asynchronous
load persistent stores where you might
want to do any other follow-up work
based on adding that iCloud store.
So again,
you're not holding up your user interface
while you're setting up the data.
And the last step here is we want
our user interface to respond now
that the new data is available.
And so we do that by listening for a
notification on our root view controller.
And this uses a notification
that Core Data generates for you,
and that is the persistent
store coordinator stores
did change notification.
And that's an indication that
there's been a change to the stores,
and it's a good time to refresh because
there might be more data available.
And at that point,
we're able to present our full UI,
our application is launched,
and our user is able to work
with their full data set.
And with that,
I'm going to turn it over to
Nick Gillette to talk about how to
implement to your application lifecycle.
I'm Nick Gillette,
I'm a software engineer
on the Core Data team,
and I'm going to talk to you today
about the application lifecycle,
which is really all the events that
your application will encounter
and have to deal with when it's
using iCloud and Core Data.
We'll talk about things like seeding,
integrating changes when they
come in from over the wire,
responding to user events,
and we'll also go over a few
performance and debugging tips.
First, I'd like to start, though,
by talking about our sample
application that we're going to ship.
So as Adam mentioned,
this application is available to you
today from the developer website.
And I've created a single class
here which encapsulates all
of our Core Data and iCloud
functionality that you can use in
your applications if you desire.
You should be aware that
it's built with Arc,
so if you're using your manual
retain and release application,
it's going to leak like crazy.
You can see that we
have two targets here,
well, two projects really.
This is a shared workspace
for this application,
and it has a Mac OS X target and
an iOS target that you can use to
create an application that shares data
between your Mac and your iOS device.
The Core Data Controller is our
central point of contact for
all the Core Data related stuff.
And the app delegate has been
decreased in functionality from
the standard Core Data template.
It no longer has a
persistent store coordinator,
and its only responsibility is to
initialize the Core Data Controller.
Inside the Core Data controller,
you'll find all the necessary
variables and things you'll
need to work with iCloud,
including the persistent
store coordinator,
a manage object context for
working on the main thread,
a few internal concurrency items,
and an implementation
of NS file presenter.
You'll also find our three persistent
stores that Adam spoke about,
the iCloud store, the fallback store,
and the local store that holds the
50 state data for our application.
Our application is pretty simple in
terms of the managed object model.
As Adam mentioned,
we have a person and a state location.
There's also a metadata entry for those
of you that wish to sync some metadata
with your application over iCloud.
You can also see the two
configurations that Adam spoke about.
Now I'll go back to the slides
and we'll talk about seeding.
So what is seeding?
Seeding, as we think of it,
is the process of injecting the data
store with some initial data set.
This usually means transferring
data to the iCloud store from
some local persistent store file.
However, you can take it to mean whatever
way you manage to inject the iCloud
store with your initial data set.
Normally when you seed the data store,
you'll already have an iCloud
store in the coordinator,
which you added with the persistent
store options for Ubiquiti,
the content name and the URL key.
You can add another store to the
coordinator by calling add persistent
store and use the NS read only
persistent store option to tell
the manage object context which store
you wish to insert entities into.
This has the added benefit of also
making sure you don't accidentally
duplicate all your seed data.
Next, you'll need to actually migrate
the objects into the store.
And to do this, we must be very careful
about memory pressure.
So we can use a batch size on the fetch
request to ensure that we don't keep
too many objects in memory at once.
When you migrate the actual objects,
you can add them to the store,
and then call
NSManageObjectContextSave and reset for
each batch size to free up the memory
consumed by the inserted objects as well.
Finally,
you want to mark the seed complete.
And this is important so that no other
devices try and reseed the iCloud
store with your initial data set.
After you've finished,
you should clean up.
In most cases,
you'll be able to delete the
seed store from the device,
freeing up a little bit of
disk space for your user.
So let's walk through the seeding code.
So in the Core Data controller,
we've broken out an area
called application lifecycle
that deals with seeding.
And you can see in here that
we've got two main methods.
One is used for adding
a person to the store,
and the other is the main seeding method.
This is called from a few different
places in the application that
I'll talk about in a minute.
Basically what we do in this application
is we set up a separate persistent
store coordinator for the seed.
Now, you might be saying, wait a minute,
you just told me that you could use
the same persistent store coordinator.
And this is true,
except if you have a very large data set.
When you have a very large data set,
you have to call manage object
context reset to free up memory
consumed by the inserted objects.
Unfortunately, when you do this,
any references to those objects that
are contained in the fetched results
array are going to be invalidated.
And you'll no longer be able to use
the results of that fetch request.
This is inconvenient for the purposes
of inserting data over a large set.
So in the sample application,
we create a separate persistent
store coordinator which
points to our seed store.
It's still mounted read only so that
we don't accidentally insert data.
And then we create a managed object
context that we use specifically
for fetching the seed objects.
This is where the fetched results array
will automatically do our memory for us.
It will maintain one batch of
objects in memory at a time,
and then free out the
rest of the objects.
We create a separate
managed object context,
which contains the iCloud store.
And this managed object context
points to our application's
persistent store coordinator,
where the iCloud store will be.
We then iterate over every
person in the seed store.
And for each batch,
we call managed object context
save to write the changes to disk,
and reset to free up the
memory consumed by the objects.
Finally,
if there are still changes left over,
maybe we had a number of
objects in the store that didn't
correspond cleanly to a batch,
we do one last save.
But where does all this
actually get called from?
Adam mentioned a little bit
of application logic that we
had in load persistent stores.
And this method is responsible for
loading all the persistent stores that
are going to be used for our application.
It takes responsibility for piping
this call back to a background queue
so that we don't impact our UI.
In async load persistent stores,
we go through and first load
the local persistent store that
contains the 50 states information.
This should be very fast.
Next, if iCloud is available,
we load the iCloud store,
which may take a while,
if it's the first time that you're
adding it to the coordinator.
For subsequent launches,
this will also be very fast.
And if necessary,
we seed the iCloud store.
Traditionally,
your application should have a little
bit more complicated check for this.
However, we wanted to make it as easy to
use as possible in the sample app,
and so we've included a simple
pound-defined macro that you can turn
on and off to see seeding happen.
This is also a good way to profile it.
After we've seeded, we dedupe,
which I'll talk about in a little bit.
If iCloud isn't available, however,
then we fall back to the fallback store.
And this is that persistent
store that Adam spoke about,
which temporarily holds data
that we want to put in iCloud.
And this is a great way to give your
user a seamless experience when they're
using iCloud and when they're not.
This is something that we automatically
detect in the sample application
and switch between as needed.
So if you sign out of the iCloud account
and you're using the sample application,
we'll automatically load
the fallback store for you.
As you can see, we also have some seeding
logic in the fallback store,
if you want to see that
happen on a local device.
So let's move on and talk
about integrating changes.
In a traditional Core Data application,
when you call NSManageObjectContext save,
you can use NSManageObjectContext
didSave notification to merge
those changes with other contexts.
With iCloud,
we created NS Persistent Store did import
ubiquitous content changes notification,
and they had to make the
slides bigger because of it.
This is how we communicate
to your application that
things changed in the cloud.
More importantly,
it's how your application will
respond and integrate those changes
into its own managed object context.
But you need to be aware that
unlike NSManageObjectContext
did save notification,
NSPersistentStore did import ubiquitous
content changes notification,
has managed object IDs,
not NSManageObjects.
So if you have any application level
logic that does merging for you,
you'll need to update it or at least
make it aware that it's dealing with
object IDs instead of managed objects.
Adam Swift
Now let's talk a little bit about
a scenario that some applications
will encounter who wish to keep a
consistent data set for their users.
Let's say that I have an iMac
that I've never used before.
It's brand new,
and I want to import all my
contact records into this machine.
So eventually,
it creates a record for my mom.
But as Adam ran into earlier,
my iMac doesn't have
an internet connection.
Maybe Comcast is having a bad day,
or my router melted.
And so I create the
same record on my phone.
My phone,
with its persistent data connection,
transfers that record into iCloud.
Later, my Mac comes online and
transfers its record.
It also downloads the
record from my phone.
And likewise, my phone downloads the
record from my iMac.
From our standpoint,
you created two records in the database.
From the user's standpoint, though,
this doesn't quite look right.
How do you deal with this?
We call this unicking,
and not in the traditional
database sense of unicking,
but in the sense that the user is
expecting to see a consistent data set,
unique by some value.
For our sample application,
we've chosen to unique
based on the email address.
And if we were traditional
database developers,
we could use this query to find
out all the duplicate email
addresses in the database and
how many times they occurred.
How do we do this with Core Data?
Well, we know that the table we want is a
list of email addresses and the number
of times they're in the database.
And we can use NS Expression to get the
count of email addresses in the database.
We can also create a fetch
request that will return to us
the email addresses and the count.
You might be wondering how,
since the count isn't a
property on any managed object.
Well,
That's where the dictionary
result type comes in.
NSDictionary result type is a
powerful construct in Core Data that
allows us to create a simulation of
arbitrary columns in the database.
They're returned to
us as key value pairs.
So when we execute this fetch request,
we'll see this SQL come
out in the console.
If you'll notice,
it looks remarkably similar
to our original query.
And this is what we'll see if we
print out the results in the debugger.
You'll notice that it's an array,
just like a normal fetch
request would return.
However, instead of manage objects,
there's a dictionary with account
and an email address in each entry.
Finally, you'll have to fetch out
all the duplicate objects.
To do this, you can use an in-predicate
and gather the array of values
from the previous result.
You can sort by email address
to make unicking easy,
and then execute the fetch request.
Finally, the most important step,
you'll have to elect a winning record.
Now, you might be thinking this
is actually the easy step,
but only if you get it right.
The problem you can run into is that,
let's say that you unique
the records based on,
say, who inserted them.
So the iMac will always say, well,
I want to keep my record,
and it will delete the
one from the iPhone.
And the iPhone will say,
I want to keep my record,
and it will delete the one from the iMac.
The net result of that
conflicting merge is that there's
no data left in the store,
which is definitely not
what your user expected.
We recommend that you use a record UUID,
such as NSUUID,
to create a string UUID or a timestamp.
If your application requires it,
you can also do multi-field
unicking by hashing a number of
fields into an integer constant
that you store on your entity.
Finally, you should use a batch
fetch request for this.
Even if your data set is small,
it's possible that there
could be a lot of unique data.
You can never really be quite certain
with any of your peers whether or
not they've created duplicates that
will be transferred to other devices.
So let's talk about the Uniquing code.
So here in the sample application,
we've created a section
specifically for Uniquing,
and it has one method called dedupe.
Ddupe is called in the application
whenever a seed happens.
We don't call it on the merge.
We don't call it when we
traditionally merge changes from
iCloud because we assume that we
haven't created any duplicates,
which knowing users is not
necessarily a safe assumption.
So in your code, you may want to call
it after every merge.
The first thing that we do is we
create a special managed object
context to be used by this operation.
This is so that we don't burden
any of the other contexts,
such as the main thread context,
with this operation.
And then we create our fetch request
with an appropriate batch size.
For us, it's 1,000 in the application.
However, depending on the size of the
entities in your data model,
this may vary.
Next, we create our count expression.
And one thing I left off the slides
is the NSExpression description
instance that we need to tell
Core Data a little bit of information
about the count's function.
We give it a name,
which is the key that will be referenced
in the dictionary that's returned.
We give it the expression.
And we tell it what type of
data it can expect as a result.
Next, we fetch the attribute description
for the email address and use
that on properties to fetch.
For properties to group by,
we simply set the email attribute.
And then, of course,
the dictionary result type,
one of the most important parts.
After we fetch the count dictionaries,
we can enumerate them,
and for any dictionary with
a value greater than one,
we pull the email address
out and add it to an array.
That array then becomes the
target value of our in predicate,
which is used with an email address
sort descriptor to get out the array
of all the possible duplicates.
And finally,
we have a simple merge algorithm,
which just sorts the UUIDs
and elects one of them.
Now, of course,
your application may have something
that's more complicated than this,
but for us, a UUID was sufficient.
Finally,
there's the usual saving and manage
object context cleanup for every batch.
So that's Uniquing.
User events.
So what do I mean by user events?
Well,
throughout your application's life cycle,
there are various events that it can
encounter that are initiated by the user.
We focused on the deletion from
documents and data where the user has
chosen to prune your application's
data from their iCloud account.
They'll receive a pop-up asking
them to do this anytime they run
out of quota space in iCloud,
and they can either buy more
or they can go through and wipe
out your application's data.
When this happens,
All of the files that exist in the
container will be deleted and become
inaccessible to your application.
So what can you do about this?
Well, there's no existing API today
to help you with this problem.
So we recommend that you use
an NS file presenter to point
to a file inside the container.
You can keep it in a no
sync or in a sync directory,
depending on how you
expect to deal with it.
If you're keeping the store
file inside the container,
this is a great thing to have
as your presented item URL.
The reason for this is that
iCloud will come through and prune
all the files in the container,
notifying you that the store
file is in the container.
file has been deleted.
This is very similar to what
happens when the account changes.
Luckily, NS File Manager has some API to
help you with this situation.
There's the Ubiquity Identity Token
method that Adam mentioned earlier,
which you can use in
application did become active,
or wherever else in your application
you feel it may serve you best,
to detect that the iCloud account is not
the same as the one that you had before.
There's also a new notification
called NS Ubiquity Identity
Did Change Notification that you
can subscribe to and you'll receive
when the device's account changes.
Responding to the iCloud
account change is fairly simple.
For our sample application,
all we need to do is remove the
iCloud store from the persistent
store coordinator and call
load persistent stores again.
However,
this would be a great place to add the
store to your coordinator as a read-only
store if you wish your user to be able
to still see the data that's in it.
So let's walk through that code.
So here we have a method
called iCloud available,
which simply checks to see if
we've stored a Ubiquiti token.
And application resumed,
which is where we actually check
to see if the token changed.
If it did,
we call iCloud account changed.
Now,
because this is the same method that we
use when we respond to the notification,
it will take a notification argument,
but we usually pass nil when
we detect the change manually.
And there we call drop stores.
And drop stores is pretty simple.
It just removes whichever store we
have mounted from our coordinator,
whether it be the iCloud
store or the fallback store.
The reason for this is that we'll
reexamine what we need to do with those
two stores in load persistent stores.
Next, we call load persistent stores,
and we fall back into that loop where
we check what we need to do with
the various stores on the system,
whether or not we can use iCloud,
whether or not we've had the
fallback store before and need
to seed it into the iCloud store,
or if we need to seed the fallback
store with some initial data set.
From the application standpoint,
you'll notice that the app
delegate has very little to do
when the actual account changes.
In Did Become Active,
we simply just call application
resumed and have the controller
check for us to see whether or
not any action needs to be taken.
Finally, I'd like to talk a little bit
about performance and debugging.
One thing you should always remember
when working with iCloud is that every
time you call NSManageObjectContextSave,
you'll actually generate
two pieces of I/O.
One is the right to the persistent store,
and the other is a log
that goes out to iCloud.
So you should be careful to coalesce
changes as appropriate and avoid
storing things like raw sensor data
that can come out at a high frequency.
For example, your application could
receive Core Location updates
at a rate of 60 hertz.
If the location hasn't changed,
there's little value to writing
this data into the store.
And as such, you may find that your user
may not benefit from this
data being synced over iCloud.
You also need to be very
aware of memory pressure.
Because of the integration with iCloud,
your application will consume slightly
more memory than normal due to us
merging changes in in the background.
And this is important because your
user will expect the application to
remain responsive and usable while
we're doing this work for them.
So you should be careful to use batched
fetch requests whenever possible,
and call NSManageObjectContextSave or
reset as aggressively as you
can to free up unneeded memory.
Finally, when things don't quite
work out as you expected,
remember that Macs are greedy peers.
They will try and download as
much information about your
iCloud account as they can,
as long as you've run at least
one iCloud-enabled application.
On Mac OS X Mountain Lion,
you can use TextEdit,
which ships with the system.
When it comes time to remove data,
the best way to do this is with
a coordinated write to delete
every file inside the container.
This will take a little bit of
time to sync to all your different
devices if you have a lot of files,
so you should be patient and make
sure that all the files you expect to
be deleted have been before you begin
working with the container again.
Finally, help us out and file great bugs.
I've been reading a lot of your bug
reports over the last six months,
and I can tell you that there's a
few things that make it a lot easier
for us to tell what's going on.
First, if you can,
please include a sample application that
demonstrates the issue you're seeing.
If not, a verbose description of how
you get the problem to reproduce
helps us out tremendously.
If you can include the container,
we would love for you to do so.
This gives us an accurate record
of everything that's happened with
our integration and your account
over the history of your devices.
However, you should be aware that we
can't guarantee confidentiality
with this information.
So if it's sensitive,
you should prune it or generate the
problem with a sample application
and attach that container.
Finally,
the most important thing you can do for
us is attach our debug console logs.
You can pass this argument,
com.apple.cordata.ubiquity.loglevel,
to your application as a launch
argument or set it as a user
default with the appropriate number.
We like level three logs,
but I have to admit they are very verbose
and will cause a lot of console spew,
which is great for me when I'm trying
to figure out what's gone wrong,
but might be a little hard
to sift through all of them.
Thanks for watching.
Bye.
on your own.
So now I'd like to take you through a
few of the debugging functions we've
included in the sample application.
So we've included a couple of
simple debugging functions that
you can use with your application.
One is to delete the container.
And this simply goes over
to the Core Data controller
and calls nuke and pave.
appropriately named.
The second is to copy the
contents of the container to
your application's local sandbox.
Now, this isn't that important on
a Mac device because you have
access to the entire disk.
However, on an iOS device,
this will copy all the contents
from your application's iCloud
container into the sandbox where
you can download them through Xcode.
And that is the best way to
attach them to us in a bug.
But what do these methods do?
Under debugging helpers,
see Nuke and Pave,
and async Nuke and Pave,
which is where the work is really done.
The first thing we do is drop
all the persistent stores.
We don't want to accidentally delete the
store file out from underneath ourselves.
Next,
we get a file in instance of NS file
coordinator and iterate over all the
sub paths in the Ubiquiti container.
We then do a coordinated write
and tell it that we are going
to be deleting these items,
and then use the file manager remove
item at URL API to remove the file.
Now, as I mentioned before,
if there are a large number
of files in the container,
it may take a little while for
iCloud to transfer all of these
changes to your various devices.
In Copy Container to Sandbox,
we don't even bother
with file coordinator,
which has two advantages.
One is that it won't trigger
a download of the file that's
a fault in your container.
Now, this may be disadvantageous for
you as an application developer,
but for us, when we're trying to
debug your container,
it's critical for us to know what
files are faults and have not
been downloaded to the device.
The other advantage is that because
it doesn't trigger downloads,
it doesn't block, so it's very fast,
meaning that there's no risk
of you getting stuck at Xcode
for two hours waiting for
files to come down from iCloud.
And that's debugging.
There's a little bit of extra
information we thought you should know.
First is that please contact
Michael Jurowicz if you have
any issues with our integration.
He's our developer evangelist.
His email address is jury@apple.com.
And there's a feedback list
that you can email us at.
We monitor it every so often,
but we're busy trying to fix your bugs,
so we might not get
back to you right away.
There's also some documentation you
can look up on developer.apple.com.
With iOS 6, we released some new release
notes for iCloud that should help
you along developing your apps.
Finally,
you can find us on the developer forums.
We do lurk there every once in
a while and answer questions
that we find relevant,
usually with "File a bug."
There are some related sessions.
There's the iCloud Storage Overview,
Core Data Best Practices,
which was this morning,
and Advanced iCloud Document Storage,
which is tomorrow at 3:15.